(smooth music)
So Gatsby plugins are exactly that.
They're plugins that make working with other packages,
other libraries,
other services easy and integrated right into into Gatsby.
And the way that we specify which plugins we want
our VA plugins array that live inside of your config.
So right below we have site metadata.
Let's use a plugins array.
So that's that.
And there's two different ways that you can specify
a plugin in Gatsby,
you can just specify the name of the plugin,
and except all of the default options that we have.
So we're actually gonna be using a styled component plugin
that surfaces the CSS to Gatsby.
And that way, Gatsby's able to figure out what the critical
CSS is and do everything it needs to do.
So let's actually install that right now.
So quotes, and then you just give it the name
of the plugin that you want.
So they usually start with gatsby-plugin
and then the name of it in our case
its gonna be styled-components and then a comma.
So that's one way.
And the other way to specify a plugin
is if there are settings that need to be set on that plugin,
you pass an object.
And then you have a resolve property on that object.
That is the name of the plugin that you're adding.
So let's, let's say this is the name of the plugin
you are adding.
So we're going to say gatsby-source-sanity.
So a lot of the plugins that are for sourcing data,
they are gatsby-source-whatever the service is.
And if we take a look at our package JSON,
you'll see like where are these coming from?
Well, I have already installed them for you.
So if you find a plugin that you wanna add to your site,
you would simply just npm install
gatsby-plugin-style-components or Gatsby-source-sanity
or whatever the different plugin is that you want.
So that's resolving there.
And then we have an options
object inside of that,
where we pass a couple different options services.
ProjectId, capital I on that D there.
And now we're gonna need the projectId, insanity.
So go to manage.sanity.io and find the project
that you're working with.
So we're gonna click on this one right here.
And we find the project ID right here.
So just copy that.
Don't use mine use yours.
The next thing is the data set that we want to work with.
So let's take a look at our data sets here.
We only have one which is production.
But if you had additional data sets,
you could totally do that.
So we'll say production.
Next thing is we want to have the watch mode of true
and what this will do is it's super cool
is that when you're in development,
and you make a change to your sanity CMS
and you as you type it and as you hit save,
it will automatically be updated inside of your Gatsby,
you don't need to rebuild the entire thing.
So you get this sort of like real time editing experience
when you're in development mode,
which is really cool.
So definitely turn that one on.
And then finally,
what we want is our token for sanity.
And how do you get your token?
Well we go to, I believe it is settings
and API.
And then we go ahead and add a new token here.
And you want a token,
just that can read because we're not gonna be writing data
to our sanity.
That's what our sanity used to do it for.
And we're also not gonna be deploying
the sanity studio either.
So we just want a read one,
we'll give it a label,
lets say Gatsby Slick's Slices.
And we're gonna go ahead and add the new token.
And you only get this token once.
Now I'm gonna be copying it.
And we'll go over here.
And actually, you know what,
I'm gonna put it in a new tab just right here just for now.
Okay, then we're done with that,
we'll go ahead and click X.
Another thing you'll want to do is you have to add
a course origin.
That if you're accessing it straight from the browser.
Now, we don't need that for localhost 8000,
because the browser will not be talking directly to sanity,
it's actually gonna be happening at build time
on the node server.
And if that's the case CORS does not apply.
CORS stands for cross origin resource sharing,
meaning cross domain.
In our case, we're not doing that yet.
We will be actually doing it this,
let me show you this home page right here,
see how these are loading
and they're not they're immediately on page load?
Because these are gonna be live pulled from sanity
and not done at build time.
So I will show you how to do that.
But for now, we'll leave it at that.
And now let's talk about the the token here.
So you don't want to put sensitive information
in your Gatsby config.
Even though this Gatsby config is not going to be surfaced,
via your website,
this file does go in your version control,
meaning that it's gonna be checked into Git.
And as a general rule of thumb,
you don't put this is called a secret.
You don't put secrets which are the equivalent to passwords
like I'm gonna have to change this.
After I record this video,
I'm gonna have to delete that token and make a new one
for myself because you could pause the screen right now.
type this entirely in and get all of my data actually,
I don't like care if you get my pizza that's fine.
But if this was more sensitive than that,
that would definitely be an issue.
So what we're gonna do is not put the token
in your Gatsby config,
but put it into a .env file.
and a .env file looks like this.
We'll go into our route.
And we'll make a new file it's .env.
So look at that.
It's there's no nothing before it,
it's just simply .env.
And then in here,
we'll say SANITY_TOKEN=
and there's no quotes here,
just copy the entire thing and paste it in.
And then the way that we access that is right here.
We say process.env.SANITY_TOKEN.
Now that's not gonna work just yet.
There's one more thing we need to do.
And that is import a package called .env.
So well say import dotenv from dotenv.
That's the package I've installed for you.
And by default sanity will surface tokens that start
with Gatsby underscore anything to your, your front end.
But it will not surface any other tokens that do not start
with Gatsby underscore.
And that's because tokens that are sensitive
and shouldn't be in the browser
should not be in the browser,
because that would allow just regular users to find you,
essentially your password to your CMS.
So we don't want that to happen.
But that does, that is not true in Gatsby config.
If you wanna access environmental variables
inside of your Gatsby config,
then you need to use this little package called .env
and it works like that.
You just say dotenv.config,
and then you pass an object where the path
is equal to .env.
I think that actually might even be the default.
But I like to just make it explicit.
I know some people like to do things like
development.env or in some of my other courses,
I've done variables.env because sometimes the .files
get lost on people's computer but in this case,
we'll just do .env.
Okay, so we have created our token we have piped it in here.
If you're like,
wondering if that has worked or not
one little debugging tip I have for you is you can simply
just console.log inside of this.
And you can go to aerial look,
it just it just console logs right here.
Usually what I would do is I would just,
I would just kill it and restart it,
but it looks like it did it.
Oh! We've got a little bit of an error here.
If you have explicit,
oh I've seen this error before.
You can, you can safely ignore this if you see that pop up.
Okay, so I have added that plugin.
I do think we need to restart but let's try this now.
We'll go back to our GraphQl,
Explorer refresh it.
We don't see any new queries pop up here.
So let's go back and kill our build and restart it.
NPM start
and take that console log out.
That's actually console logging
environmental variables is actually a bit of an issue
because if you have a log on a server,
then your server will have access to that.
So be careful with that.
GraphQl API not deployed.
Okay, now, we forgot a step here.
We need to go ahead and deploy a GraphQL API for sanity
because by default,
sanity has what's called a grok API.
And if you want a GraphQL API,
which is actually built with grok, it's kind of cool.
Then we need to enable that so just go click on the link
that they have here.
It says by deploying a GraphQL API,
let's click through that there's some,
here we go sanity graphql deploy.
And I believe that is it.
Let's try it.
Let's go over to our sanity tab
and make not in your Gatsby tab kill your sanity.
And we'll say sanity deploy graph.
Was it deploy?
No sanity graphql deploy.
And I believe we have to give it the name of our data set,
which is production.
Again, the name of the data set can be found
right here.
So if you want to enable graphql playground Y.
There we go and it actually gives us a URL
of our GraphQL API,
so we can go ahead and click that.
So this is something called GraphQL playground,
which is very similar or it's based upon graphical.
It just looks a little bit different.
But you can actually see a list of all of your queries
by clicking on the schema tab.
And you'll see look, pizza topping person.
So let's look for already we have all pizza,
let's let's do that query.
All whoops!
All pizza.
And then what will do is return you a list of pizzas,
but we need to get fields for each of our pizzas.
So we'll say the name of the pizza.
And the,
I think that's let's just see if that works.
Do we have a description for our pizzas?
We'll check, run it.
Boom, there's our two pizzas that get deployed.
Now this is not our Gatsby API.
This is our sanity API,
we're actually not gonna be working with this API directly
just yet.
We want to get the data out of the sanity API
and into the Gatsby API.
So by restarting this,
that should then go ahead slurp up all the data from sanity
and stick it into our Gatsby GraphQL API.
See, look here, sanity fetching,
schema transforming it all.
Blah, blah, blah.
And there we go.
So we go back to our GraphQL Explorer,
we refresh this sucker.
Hey, look at that.
They've all shown up.
Now the queries are gonna look a little bit different
than this.
We can't just say all pizza,
because they are a little bit different in Gatsby land,
versus sanity land but you see
that they are all available here.
So Let's try it.
All sanity pizza is the query that gives you all pizzas.
So open that up.
And then for each pizza,
let's go ahead and we wanna grab the,
I think it's the node yeah?
Because that's, that's the individual pizza.
And then for each node,
we want the name and the price for it.
So let's go ahead and run that.
Look at that veggie delight price.
You can go a little bit further and reference the slug.
And you can see you can grab the current
is how you actually get the name of the slug.
But the slug has also has a key and a type available
with that as well that you could grab,
you'll see here,
it returns it to us.
It's not not that useful to us,
so we can go ahead and delete that.
That's cool.
And now I'm gonna show you like one really,
really nifty thing about GraphQL.
So one of the benefits of GraphQL is that you can query
as much data as you want.
So even if I wanted to query all of the pizzas,
in the same query,
I could also query allsanityperson.
And for each person,
I want the nodes.
And we want their name.
Let her run that you see all person.
So that's One really cool thing
is that there's only one endpoint of GraphQL.
And we can grab all of the data that we want.
Furthermore, we can also
go for nested data types.
So pizzas have toppings, right?
So we can say toppings.
And for each topping,
we want the name so run it.
So now we're seeing here that we get all of the pizzas
and for each pizza, we get the name, the price, the slug,
and then the topping in each name.
So you imagine in Gatsby we'll be able to fetch
all this data and loop over it,
and display it in each of our templates,
which is really cool.
We can also select individual pizzas.
So if we were to grab the ID of a pizza,
let's grab the master pizza ID.
Let's just copy and paste that into a new thing here.
And I'm gonna just commas that out.
I just hit command forward slash there.
And let's write a query.
Trying to make this sucker smaller.
Oh, there we go.
I got rid of it.
How do I get it back?
Oh, Explorer.
There we go.
Cool.
So query.
We want to grab just a sanity pizza.
So that's a single pizza.
If you ever want to create a single pizza.
And in this case,
you have to tell it which one you want,
based on any of these fields here.
So we wanna grab a pizza,
or the ID is equal to and this is GraphQl,
so you have to use double quotes when you're doing
this thing,
and then just go ahead and paste in the ID of that pizza.
And then for that pizza,
we don't need nodes because it's not an array anymore,
we can simply just ask for the name of that pizza,
and go ahead and run it.
And ah, expected string query operator input found ID.
Okay, so this is telling us that it wasn't expecting us
to pass it an ID directly.
It was expecting us to pass a different type of input.
So I don't know what that is.
Let's go ahead and look at it and I can figure out
what it is expecting by going to this Doc's tab here
and clicking on query,
and then it will give you a list of all of the queries.
So ours is sanity pizza.
So click on that.
And it's telling us the ID is not supposed to be a string,
but a StringQueryOperatorinput.
What is that?
I don't know, click on it.
Hey, there we go.
So it's expecting an object,
not a string to say equal, not equal, in, not in regex,
or glob.
So I believe I bet,
we can just do change this to a, an object.
Let me say where the ID is equal to that.
And then go ahead and run it.
There we go.
So that is what we got.
And that's actually kind of cool
because we can use those operators.
And not just use the ID,
we can say, give me a sanity pizza
where the name
equals, doesn't equal, or regex.
We can say regex I believe, quotes veggie.
This probably won't return anything.
Nothing no and if I put I there,
it returns to us Veggie Delight what that I means
insensitive case insensitive as a capital V on there.
I put a lowercase V here.
And that's really cool because if you wanna search
for a specific pizza but you only know,
if you only know the sort of the name of it,
or what the one word that is in it,
you can go ahead and use that.
And similarly you can also use all sanity pizza
to get all the pizzas that have the word veggie in them.
Of course, we can do things like toppings,
and grab the name of that topping as well as,
what do we have?
Yeah, we have a vegetarian Boolean
on each of those toppings, which is cool.
And then where's the other one called master?
Let's see if that works.
Beautiful master pizza.
Cool, cool, cool.
So now that the data is in our GraphQL Explorer,
we're able to in the next video,
pull the data out of here by writing queries
and get it into the actual templates of our Gatsby website.